source-repository versus source-repository-package (#9701)
haskell/cabal: doc/how-to-source-packages.rst

   same **source code repository** but in separate folders. The root of the
   repository is assumed when the ``subdir`` field is omitted.

.. Warning::

   The ``source-repository`` field, the one without "package" is for a package!

   The ``source-repository-package`` field, the one with "package" isn't for a
   package! It's for a project dependency.

.. _pkg-authors:

"Source" as a Package Author
----------------------------

If you are authoring or maintaining a package and want to link to the
:ref:`package source<pkg-author-source>` you will be dealing with
``source-repository``, a package description stanza that typically specifies
where upstream development of the package is happening.  A package published to
hackage will be displayed with a link to the source repository if a
``source-repository`` stanza is present in the package description.

.. _pkg-consumers:

"Source" as a Package Consumer
------------------------------

Cabal commands that work with dependencies actually need to have the source
code of each dependency and will download it as needed. Example of commands
like this are ``cabal build`` or ``cabal freeze``.

> Dependencies of packages in a project are sourced, by default, from the hackage

Author: :+1:

package repository. Cabal will download the *source code* ``.tar.gz`` archive
for these from hackage.

We can also :ref:`take a dependency from a source code

> repository<pkg-consume-source>`. These are accessed via a version control system

Reviewer: works

(VCS) such as Git and set up in the project with ``source-package-repository``
stanzas. With these, we can take dependencies on packages not published to

> hackage, on revisions not yet published or on forks.  This is the easiest way to

Author: :+1:

work with a fork, much easier than using a Git submodule.  A dependency taken
this way, effectively adds a local package to the project much like listing the
package's source directory in the packages field, except that the source code is

> downloaded by cabal using the version control system.

Author: :+1:

> How to get package *source code*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How to use package *source code*
```

Author: I went with "How to locate and get package *source code* and reworked the introductory two sentences of that section.

Author: Thought that "locate and get" was too long. Considered "muster" but the meaning I'm familiar with is NZ/AU only so went with "shepherd".

================================

We can **"source"** or obtain the package *source code* and we can leave a
**"source"** marker in the package description that shows where to find the
*source code*. This marker is the ``source-repository`` field and is described

> in the :ref:`package author<pkg-authors>` section.

Reviewer: As this paragraph gives an overview over the guide, a sentence about `source-repository-package` and a ref to _pkg-consumers would be good (as it was before)

Author: I've added back the ref for this.

   version of the package description. With version control systems, a revision
   is a commit. Thankfully, when telling Cabal about a "commit" or "revision",
   the field name is something completely different, a ``tag``.

Fields pointing to *source code* repositories
---------------------------------------------

Source [code] repositories are a way to specify where to find the source code
for a package, both for :ref:`package authors<pkg-authors>` and maintainers and
for :ref:`package consumers<pkg-consumers>`.

A relatively structured set of version control system (VCS) fields, that vary
depending on the :ref:`VCS kind<vcs-kind>`, enables Cabal commands and other
tools to interpret and make effective use of this information.

``source-repository``
   Says where to find the source for a package and is a metadata field of a
   **package description**. This is the source marker.

``source-repository-package``
   Locates the source for one or more **project dependencies** that live in the
   same **source code repository** but in separate folders. The root of the
   repository is assumed when the ``subdir`` field is omitted.

.. Warning::

>    The ``source-repository`` field, the one without "package" is for a package!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The ``source-repository`` field, the one without a "-package" suffix, belongs to a package!
```

Author: :+1:

   This actually makes perfect sense as it's within the package description
   looking outwards.

   .. code-block:: text

       (package description)      source-repository         (Git repository)
      solver-benchmarks.cabal ──────────────────────────⮚ github/haskell/cabal

      $ cat solver-benchmarks.cabal
      ...
      source-repository head
         type:     git
         location: https://github.com/haskell/cabal/
         subdir:   solver-benchmarks
      ...
      library
         build-depends:

>       ...

Reviewer: better remove this `...`

Author: I'm eliding dependencies, not wanting to show them all. I was able to get it done in fewer lines by changing to;

```
library
   build-depends: base, ..., vector
```

Not verbatim from the package description but close enough.

            vector

>       ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           ...
```

Author: I removed that line by running dependencies together in one line, `build-depends: base, ..., vector`.

>    The ``source-repository-package`` field, the one with "package" isn't for a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The ``source-repository-package`` field, the one with a "-package" suffix, doesn't belong to a
```

Is that correct though? I always thought you could add this field to a `*.cabal` file as well.

Reviewer 2: No, it's `cabal.project` only.

Author: I've made the change to match the suggestion.

   package! It's for a project dependency. This name is a bit misleading because

>    it can describe multiple dependencies and not just one. That it is for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   it can describe multiple package dependencies and not just one. That it is for
```

Author: I went with;

```rst
   The ``source-repository-package`` field, the one with a "-package" suffix,
   doesn't belong to a package! It's for a project dependency. This name is a
   bit misleading being singular because it can describe multiple dependency
   packages at the same location, each offset by a directory containing a
   package description, a ``.cabal`` file.
 ```

   "package" also makes sense. Ultimately it is the union of all dependencies of
   local packages within the project that actually declare the set of project
   dependencies, not the project.  The project can tighten version constraint
   ranges with ``constraints`` or loosen them with ``allow-newer`` or

>    ``allow-older`` but it cannot add or remove dependencies.

Reviewer: This paragraph is hard to follow without an example and a clearer distinction between my local project and the remote/external dependency repository.

Author: I made this a separate warning and simplified it.

   This project stanza is like a redirect or override for dependencies of all
   the packages in the project saying "use this source code repository" for this
   package dependency, not Hackage.

   .. code-block:: text

        (project)       source-repository-package         (Git repository)
      cabal.project ──────────────────────────────────⮚ github/haskell/vector

      $ tree
      ...
      └── solver-benchmarks
         └── solver-benchmarks.cabal

      $ cat cabal.project
      packages: solver-benchmarks
      ...
      source-repository-package
         type:     git
         location: https://github.com/haskell/vector.git
         subdir:   vector

.. _pkg-consumers:

> *Source code* when taking a package dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taking *Source code* as a package dependency
```

Author: I disagree with this change of section title. The section talks about how Cabal deals with source code as well. The section starts with this before it goes on to talk about how to deal with dependency source code ourselves.

Author: @malteneuss if you agree, can you please resolve this conversation?

Reviewer: I can't due to https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/8327 xD

Author: OK, I can mark it as resolved.

         $ cd dist-newstyle/src/vector-51ba9353b7a850a

         $ git rev-parse HEAD
         6b8bbc3a75b40451d8d225e30c576dfe89121c49

*Source code* when dependency vendoring
---------------------------------------

If you want to include the source code of a package in your project, you can use
the archive or the unpacked source code. This is called *vendoring* where you
add the source code of an external package to your project.

Vendoring a *source code* archive
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After manually downloading a source code archive from Hackage (or elsewhere),
you can add it to your project as a local package.

   .. code-block:: shell

      $ VER=0.13.1.0 \
         curl -sSL https://hackage.haskell.org/package/vector-{$VER}/vector-{$VER}.tar.gz \
         --output vector-{$VER}.tar.gz \
      $ VER=0.13.1.0 echo "packages: vector-$VER.tar.gz" >> cabal.project
      $ cabal build vector --dry-run
      ...
      Resolving dependencies...
      Build profile: -w ghc-9.8.2 -O1
      In order, the following would be built (use -v for more details):
      - vector-0.13.1.0 (lib) (requires build)

Vendoring unpacked *source code*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> You can use ``cabal get`` and then add the unpack directory to the ``packages``

Reviewer: A ref to cabal get section would be good

Author: :+1:

field in the project's ``cabal.project`` file.  This downloads the package's

> ``.tar.gz`` source code archive and extracts it to directory named after the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``.tar.gz`` source code archive and extracts it to a directory named after the
```

Author: :+1:

package name and version.

- For an exact version of the package, use the package name and version.

   .. code-block:: shell

      $ VER=0.12.3.1 cabal get vector-{$VER}
      Unpacking to vector-0.12.3.1/
      $ VER=0.12.3.1 echo "packages: vector-$VER" >> cabal.project

- For the latest version of the package, use the package name only after a ``cabal update``.

   .. code-block:: shell

      $ cabal update
      $ cabal get vector
      Unpacking to vector-0.13.1.0/
      $ echo "packages: vector-0.13.1.0" >> cabal.project

You can vendor unpacked source code obtained by other means, by means that

> replace the ``cabal unpack`` step, in the same way.

Reviewer: There's no `cabal unpack` call here.

Author: Thanks. I went with;

```rst
   .. code-block:: shell

      $ cabal update
      $ cabal get vector
      Unpacking to vector-0.13.1.0/
      $ echo "packages: vector-0.13.1.0" >> cabal.project

You can vendor unpacked source code obtained by other means, by means that
replace the ``cabal get`` unpacking step, in the same way.
```

> Fork don't vendor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fork, don't vendor
```

Author: :+1:

to it or if they want to try out the latest changes before they're published.
The simplest way to try out the latest changes is to add a
``source-repository-package`` dependency on the package so that it will be
picked up from the source code repository instead of from Hackage.

.. Note::

   It is easy to copy the fields of ``source-repository`` to set up a
   ``source-repository-package`` project source code repository dependency as
   they share many of the same :ref:`VCS fields<vcs-fields>`. Let's see an
   example, again using the ``vector`` package;

   Looking at vector's `package description <vector-pkg-desc_>`_ on Hackage we
   see the ``source-repository`` stanza:

   .. code-block:: cabal

      source-repository head
         type:     git
         location: https://github.com/haskell/vector.git
         subdir:   vector

   To turn that into a dependency we'd add the following to our project, adding
   a ``tag`` field if we wanted to pin to a particular commit;

   .. code-block:: cabal

      source-repository-package
         type:     git
         location: https://github.com/haskell/vector.git
         subdir:   vector

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to add a tag field to the example to point to the 0.13.1.0 version and continue the theme of using that version throughout the  guide page

Author: Can do now that I see there's a tag for it. This version is not in [github/vector releases](https://github.com/haskell/vector/releases) but there is a [vector-0.13.1.0 tag](https://github.com/haskell/vector/tree/vector-0.13.1.0).

Author: I've include the tag field in the example and shown how I got that commit hash, with;

```
$ git ls-remote --tags
From git@github.com:haskell/vector.git
...
79bdd2edcfaf6b07f7fabc43a7d9c5a2ff93d3ca     refs/tags/vector-0.13.1.0
```

I also moved this content, that was in a note, up to a subsection. I gave it the title of "Setting up a source code dependency".

> How to shepherd package *source code*

Author: I'm using https://www.thesaurus.com/browse/guide for inspiration. Maybe "handle" covers all the cases; marking, getting, redirecting etc, well enough.

> How to shepherd package *source code*

Author: Went with "deal with".

         location: https://github.com/haskell/cabal/
         subdir:   solver-benchmarks
      ...
      library
         build-depends: base, ..., vector

   The ``source-repository-package`` field, the one with a "-package" suffix,
   doesn't belong to a package! It's for a project dependency. This name is a
   bit misleading being singular because it can describe multiple dependency
   packages at the same location, each offset by a directory containing a
   package description, a ``.cabal`` file.

   This project stanza is like a redirect or override for dependencies of all
   the packages in the project saying "use this source code repository" for this
   package dependency, not Hackage.

   .. code-block:: text

        (project)       source-repository-package         (Git repository)
      cabal.project ──────────────────────────────────> github/haskell/vector

      $ tree
      ...
      └── solver-benchmarks
         └── solver-benchmarks.cabal

      $ cat cabal.project
      packages: solver-benchmarks
      ...
      source-repository-package
         type:     git
         location: https://github.com/haskell/vector.git
         subdir:   vector

.. Warning::

>    Cabal project, ``cabal.project``, files don't declare dependencies!

Author: :+1:

      - vector-0.13.1.0 (lib) (requires build)

Vendoring unpacked *source code*
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can use :ref:`cabal get<cabal-get>` and then add the unpack directory to the
``packages`` field in the project's ``cabal.project`` file.  This downloads the
package's ``.tar.gz`` source code archive and extracts it to a directory named
after the package name and version.

- For an exact version of the package, use the package name and version.

   .. code-block:: shell

      $ VER=0.12.3.1 cabal get vector-{$VER}
      Unpacking to vector-0.12.3.1/
      $ VER=0.12.3.1 echo "packages: vector-$VER" >> cabal.project

- For the latest version of the package, use the package name only after a ``cabal update``.

   .. code-block:: shell

      $ cabal update
      $ cabal get vector
      Unpacking to vector-0.13.1.0/
      $ echo "packages: vector-0.13.1.0" >> cabal.project

You can vendor unpacked source code obtained by other means, by means that
replace the ``cabal get`` unpacking step, in the same way.

Fork, don't vendor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
There's no need to vendor packages on Hackage if you expect Hackage to always be

> available as packages cannot be deleted from Hackage. Source code repositories,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
available, as packages cannot be deleted from Hackage. Source code repositories,
```

Author: :+1:

> How to source packages

Author: I'd like to keep his guide about everything source. I hope the expanded introduction helps.

> How to source packages

Author: I change the guide title to "How to get package *source code*".

======================

Package Source
--------------

When we publish a package, its source is available from the package repository

> [#]_. The other way to access a package's source is from a source repository [#]_.

Reviewer: A higher level cabal-independent wording could help with context and clarity here. Probably something along the lines of
"When we publish a package, we can help users of our package to locate its source code by adding
package repository metadata [#]_ to our package. However, when we want use a package that is not, or not in the right version, available on Hackage, we can add that package that directly from its source repository (e.g. Git) [#]_."

Author: I'll have another go at this. I wanted to mention the two ways of getting source as a package consumer; 1) from hackage and 2) from a git repo.

![image](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/assets/633283/32d17f2b-465a-433e-98df-4928e37622d7)

Author: @malteneuss I've expand the introduction and added a section "Manually Obtaining Package *Source Code*" before talking about how cabal does this automatically.

Source Repositories
-------------------

Source repositories are a way to specify where to find the source code for a
package, both for :ref:`package authors<pkg-authors>` and maintainers and for
:ref:`package consumers<pkg-consumers>`.

A relatively structured set of version control system (VCS) fields, that vary
depending on the :ref:`VCS kind<vcs-kind>`, enables cabal commands and other
tools to interpret and make effective use of this information.

- ``source-repository`` says where to find the source for a **package description**

> - ``source-repository-package`` locates source for **project dependencies**

Reviewer: Better "locates the source code to be added as a **project dependency**"

Author: I went with this suggestion, change the list to be a description list and added a warning about the confusing names.

.. _pkg-authors:

As a Package Author
-------------------

If you are authoring or maintaining a package and want to link to the
:ref:`package source<pkg-author-source>` you will be dealing with
``source-repository``, a package description stanza that typically specifies
where upstream development of the package is happening.  A package published to

> hackage will be displayed with a link to the source repository if a

Reviewer: Hackage (uppercase)

Author: Thanks, all uppercase now.

``source-repository`` stanza is present in the package description.

.. _pkg-consumers:

As a Package Consumer
---------------------

Cabal commands that work with dependencies actually need to have the source
code of each dependency and will download it as needed. Example of commands
like this are ``cabal build`` or ``cabal freeze``.

> Dependencies of packages in a project are sourced, by default, from the hackage

Reviewer: better use a more common wording like "project are downloaded". Sourced feels only familiar to experienced terminal users.

Author: I opted to use "sourced" in the everyday sense as in obtain or get.

> package repository. Cabal will download the source for these from hackage.

Reviewer: Better "the source code and ..." something else you want to mention if you indeed want to emphasize something here, otherwise it's redundant to the sentence before.

Author: I started putting *source code* in italics. I hope that helps. I've changed this to;

```rst
Dependencies of packages in a project are sourced, by default, from the hackage
package repository. Cabal will download the *source code* ``.tar.gz`` archive
for these from hackage.
```

We can also take dependencies on :ref:`source packages<pkg-consume-source>`

> that are accessed via a version control system (VCS) such as git and set up in

Reviewer: Git (uppercase)

Author: Thanks for noticing. Corrected.

> the project with ``source-package-repository`` stanzas. With these, we can take

Reviewer: stanzas ->  sections. stanzas (although technically correct) is less familiar and understandable than section. Even better to add a reference to the cabal project description-file section.

Author: Seems like we're using "section" in the guide and "stanza" in the reference, aren't we?

Author: I added a link but kept "stanza".

```
We can also :ref:`take a dependency from a source code
repository<pkg-consume-source>`. These are accessed via a version control system
(VCS) such as Git and set up in the project with ``source-package-repository``
stanzas.
```

dependencies on packages not published to hackage, on revisions not yet
published or on forks.  This is the easiest way to work with a fork, much

> easier than using a git submodule.  A dependency taken this way, effectively

Reviewer: Git (uppercase)

Author: Thanks again, fixed.

adds a local package to the project much like listing the package's source
directory in the packages field, except that the source code is downloaded by
cabal using the version control system.

> .. [#] Each package on hackage is available for download as a ``.tar.gz``

Reviewer: Hackage (uppercase)

Author: Footnote moved to note and casing fixed.

   source archive. For example, here's the direct link to download
   `vector-0.13.1.0.tar.gz <vector-download>`_.

.. [#] Also known as a source control repository or version control system
   (VCS) repository.

> .. _vector-download: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/vector-0.13.1.0/vector-0.13.1.0.tar.gz

Reviewer: Maybe you could add an example how to add such a tar.gz file as a package dependency?
And also an example using Git would be good as this is the most common VCS

Author: Yes, thanks for suggesting adding these examples.

Author: I've added a whole vendoring section about this.
